Great job on that last section.
Now that you're familiar with diagnosis codes,
procedure codes will be a piece of cake.
So what is a procedure?
For EHR records, this can encompass everything from surgeries to an X-ray.
It will be important again to note the context of the procedure,
whether it occurs in an inpatient or outpatient setting.
So for procedures, we really want to focus on three major code sets.
The first is another ICD-10 code set that is maintained by the US CMS,
and applies to only in-patient procedures.
This is called ICD-10 procedure coding system and has over
73,000 codes of which most are in the medical and surgical category.
The second major code set that you should be familiar with for
procedures is current procedural terminology or CPT codes,
which are maintained by the AMA and focus on professional services by physicians.
They mostly apply to outpatient,
but can also be used for ambulatory settings or impatient if you have a physician visit.
The last procedure code set we will cover is
the Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System,
otherwise known as HCPCS,
and is used for both inpatient and outpatient.
It is a bit more complicated in that HCPCS
has three levels and the first level is just the CPT codes,
but for the second level they are for
non-physician services and include additional codes non-CPT like DME,
ambulatory services and dental services.
By the way, DME stands for durable medical equipment.
You will come across this for some sections of the HCPCS codes, especially.
The final and third level is for local codes that are Medicare, Medicaid specific.
The maintenance of the last two levels are by CMS and the ADA.
We will now focus on HCPCS codes,
but we want to expose you to them.
HCPCS level 1 and 2 are the ones that you would most likely see in practice.
So let's go into more detail about the ICD10-PCS structure.
The codes are seven alphanumeric characters,
and the first character is for this section.
The subsequent characters depend on the section,
but generally give the body system, body part,
approach and device used for a procedure.
Here is a view of the different sections for IC10-PCS.
This image is also available in the class firm for you to use as a reference if needed.
As mentioned earlier, it really depends on the section for the structure,
but there are some similar parts and we'll go through one section as an example.
To illustrate, we'll go through a heart surgery example, 027004Z ,
which is dilation of coronary artery,
one site with drug-eluting intraluminal device, open approach.
A mouthful for sure.
Let's see how each part is mapped.
So let's go character by character with how to map this example.
The first character for this procedure is zero,
and this maps to the medical and surgical section.
The next character is two and maps to the heart and great vessels system.
Then the next character is seven and refers to
dilation because we are expanding a coronary artery in this case.
Then as you can see in the next three columns of the table,
you can pick the body part,
or in this case, how many arteries,
then the approach for their procedure and finally the device if any used.
The last part is the qualifier.
So next we will go through the structure for CPT codes.
First, the CPT codes have up to five numbers.
They are only numeric characters.
There are also three categories of CPT codes,
and for most part you should focus on the first two.
Category 1 is the first one,
and these are the billable codes.
There are 10 sections for CPT category 1
and here are the code ranges in the section names.
As you can see, they're largely split along biological systems and service areas.
Category 2 is the section that has
the performance measures that focus on things like physicals, patient history, etc.
These are codes that are non-billable and have the five digits that end in
F. Category 3 is one for emerging temporary codes that may be added later.
This may be important to look at for very new procedures and there's
some time and process by the AMA to add these codes later.
Now that we're at the end of this section,
you are ready to work with procedure codes.
Let's get started with the exercise.